---
wiki-publish: true
aliases:
  - electromagnetic interaction
---
**Electromagnetism**, more formally the **electromagnetic interaction**, is the [[fundamental interaction]] that governs the attraction and repulsion between objects possessing [[electric charge]]. Electromagnetism occurs through the [[Electric field|electric]] and [[Magnetic field|magnetic fields]] generated by a charge, which enact a [[Lorentz force]] onto other charged objects. In the simplest case of a stationary point charge $q$, no magnetic field is present, the force is central and either attractive (to equal charges) or repulsive (to opposite charges). It is then described by the [[electric potential]]
$$V(r)=\frac{1}{4\pi\varepsilon_{0}}\frac{q}{r}$$
where $r$ is the distance from the charge and $\varepsilon_{0}$ is the [[vacuum permittivity]]. The Lorentz [[force]] is given by Coulomb's law
$$\mathbf{F}=Q\mathbf{E}=-Q\nabla V=\frac{1}{4\pi\varepsilon_{0}}\frac{qQ}{r^{2}}\hat{\mathbf{r}}$$
where $Q$ is another charge a distance $r$ from the source charge $q$.

The modern theory of electromagnetism is **quantum electrodynamics** (QED). Electromagnetism is an exchange interaction mediated by the [[photon]], one of the four known [[gauge boson|gauge bosons]].

Electromagnetism has infinite range, meaning it can affect objects at any distance.
### Coupling constant
The electromagnetic [[coupling constant]] is known as the [[fine-structure constant]], defined as
$$\alpha=\frac{e^{2}}{4\varepsilon_{0}\hbar c}=\frac{1}{137.03\ldots}$$
where
- $e$ is the [[elementary charge]],
- $\hbar$ is the [[Planck constant]],
- $c$ is the [[speed of light]],
- $\varepsilon_{0}$ is the [[vacuum permittivity]].

Notably, the fine-structure constant is universal. All electromagnetic interactions are regulated by the same coupling constant.
### Interaction with matter
[[Electromagnetic radiation]] is mediated by photons and can convert all or part of its [[energy]] by interacting with [[atom|atoms]] and atomic [[Atomic nucleus|nuclei]] in three main ways:
- [[Photoelectric effect]]: the photon is absorbed by the atom to raise the energy eigenstate of an [[electron]].
- [[Compton scattering]]: the photon is [[particle scattering|scattered]] by an electron through absorption and re-emission, so that only part of the energy is ultimately absorbed and the photon undergoes an angular deflection.
- **Electron–positron pair production**: the photon “decays” spontaneously into an electron–positron pair.
