**Gauss' law** describes the flux of an [[electric field]] generated by a [[Electric charge|charge]] passing within a closed [[Superficie|surface]] through that surface. Given a system of charges or a charge object within the enclosing surface $S$, the flux must be
$$\oint_{S}\mathbf{E}\cdot d\mathbf{S}=\frac{Q_{enc}}{\varepsilon_{0}}$$
where $Q_{enc}$ is the total charge enclosed within the surface and $d\mathbf{S}$ is the normal vector on the surface element $dS$. This is true for any surface and and any charge distribution therein. It can be expressed in differential form through the divergence of the field:
$$\nabla\cdot\mathbf{E}=\frac{\rho}{\varepsilon_{0}}$$
where $\rho$ is the volume charge density.
### Derivation
Consider a point charge $q$ within a sphere of radius $R$. The outgoing flux is going to be
$$\oint_{S}\mathbf{E}\cdot d\mathbf{S}=\int \frac{1}{4\pi\varepsilon_{0}}\left(\frac{q}{r^{2}}\hat{\mathbf{r}}\right)\cdot(r^{2}\sin\theta d\theta d\phi \hat{\mathbf{r}})=\frac{q}{\varepsilon_{0}}$$
The important thing to note here is that this occurs only because [[Interazione elettromagnetica|Coulomb's law]] goes like $\sim 1/r^{2}$, as this cancels out perfectly with the area that goes like $\sim r^{2}$. Any more or less and the flux would depend on the chosen area, but it does not. This can be easily extended to any number of [[particella|particles]] by principle of superposition. Consider $N$ charges, all within the surface. The total field is
$$\mathbf{E}=\sum\limits_{i=1}^{N}\mathbf{E}_{i}$$
so the previous statement becomes
$$\oint_{S}\mathbf{E}\cdot d\mathbf{S}=\sum\limits_{i=1}^{N}\left(\oint\mathbf{E}_{i}\cdot d\mathbf{S}\right)=\sum\limits_{i=1}^{N} \frac{q_{i}}{\varepsilon_{0}}$$
calling the total enclosed charge $Q_{enc}=\sum\limits_{i=1}^{N}q_{i}$ we get Gauss' law
$$\oint_{S}\mathbf{E}\cdot d\mathbf{S}=\frac{Q_{enc}}{\varepsilon_{0}}$$
The differential form is derived by use of the [[Teorema della divergenza|divergence theorem]]:
$$\oint_{S}\mathbf{E}\cdot d\mathbf{S}=\int_{V}(\nabla\cdot\mathbf{E})\ d\tau$$
If we express the enclosed charge through a volume density by
$$Q_{enc}=\int_{V}\rho\ d\tau$$
we get
$$\int_{V}(\nabla\cdot\mathbf{E})\ d\tau=\int_{V} \frac{\rho}{\varepsilon_{0}}\ d\tau$$
The integrals are in the same variable and over the same domain, so to be equal, the integrands must be equal. Thus
$$\nabla\cdot\mathbf{E}=\frac{\rho}{\varepsilon_{0}}$$
### Usage
Gauss' law in integral form is by far the most convenient way of calculating the electric field of a system, provided symmetry works in one's favor.
#### Ball
Consider a ball of radius $R$ and total charge $q$. Imagine a sphere of radius $r>R$ (often called a *Gaussian surface*). In this case, $Q_{enc}=q$. Symmetry allows us extract $\mathbf{E}$ out of the integral. In fact, $\mathbf{E}$ is always perpendicular to surface element (i.e. it's radial)[^1], as is the surface normal, so the [[Prodotto scalare|dot product]] between the two can be dropped
$$\int \mathbf{E}\cdot d\mathbf{a}=\int |\mathbf{E}|\ da$$
The magnitude of the electric fields depends on the distance, but the distance is constant over a sphere centered on the charge, so we can pull it out of the integral
$$\int|\mathbf{E}|\ da=|\mathbf{E}|\int da=|\mathbf{E}|4\pi R^{2}$$
Applying Gauss' law we get
$$|\mathbf{E}|4\pi R^{2}=\frac{q}{\varepsilon_{0}}$$
Since we know the direction of $\mathbf{E}$, we can "reverse engineer" the $\mathbf{E}$ vector from just its magnitude: $|E|\hat{\mathbf{r}}=\mathbf{E}$. Thus, we have
$$\mathbf{E}=\frac{1}{4\pi R^{2}} \frac{q}{\varepsilon_{0}}\hat{\mathbf{r}}$$
This way, we got the field generated by a ball (or even a sphere, really) without doing a single integral. The crucial part here is that the system is spherically symmetrical. If it weren't then $\mathbf{E}$ would not have been aligned with $d\mathbf{a}$ and we wouldn't have been able to pull $|\mathbf{E}|$ out of the integral.

[^1]: $\mathbf{E}$ can't not be radial. The ball is static and perfectly smooth, so there is not point of reference, like say, an axis of [[rotation]]. This means any direction is equal, as any direction that's chosen could just as easily be chosen to be anything else. The only direction that has "character" to it, in the sense that it can be actually be defined, is the radial direction.