---
wiki-publish: true
---
**Electric displacement** $\mathbf{D}$ is a [[Vector field|vector field]] that accounts for the electromagnetic effects of both the [[electric field]] generated by [[dielectric polarization]] and an external electric field. In other words, it handles both the source and response fields at the same time. It is defined as
$$\mathbf{D}=\varepsilon_{0}\mathbf{E}+\mathbf{P}$$
where $\varepsilon_{0}$ is the [[Vacuum permittivity|vacuum permittivity]], $\mathbf{E}$ is the external field and $\mathbf{P}$ is the polarization. Like polarization, it has the units of a surface [[electric charge|charge]] distribution.

Unlike $\mathbf{E}$, there is no "[[Interazione elettromagnetica|Coulomb's law]]" for displacement as the [[Curl]] of $\mathbf{D}$ is not necessarily zero:
$$\nabla\times\mathbf{D}=\nabla\times\mathbf{P}$$
It is only zero if the polarization is irrotational, and it usually isn't. An example of irrotational polarization is when the external charge density is zero, that is, there is no external field.
### Gauss' law
It obeys a form of [[Gauss' law]] that is similar to that of the electric field
$$\nabla\cdot\mathbf{D}=\rho_{f},\qquad \oint \mathbf{D}\cdot d\mathbf{a}=Q_{f,enc}$$
in both differential and integral forms. $\rho_{f}$ is the free charge density (the one responsible for the external field) and $Q_{f,enc}$ is the total electric charge of $\rho_{f}$ enclosed within the Gaussian surface.
### Boundary conditions
As the displacement is dependent on the electric field, it inherits the discontinuity over surface charges. From the integral form of Gauss' law we get
$$D_\text{above}^{\perp}-D_\text{below}^{\perp}=\sigma_{f}$$
and from the curl of $D$ we get
$$\mathbf{D}_\text{above}^{\parallel}-\mathbf{D}_\text{below}^{\parallel}=\mathbf{P}_\text{above}^{\parallel}-\mathbf{P}_\text{below}^{\parallel}$$
When dealing with dielectrics, these may be more meaningful than the boundary conditions on the electric field itself.