The **curl** $\nabla\times\mathbf{F}$ of a [[Differenziabilità|differentiable]] vector function $\mathbf{F}$ is a [[Campo vettoriale|vector field]] that represents the [[circulation]] of $\mathbf{F}$ around a point. In simpler terms, it describes how much $\mathbf{F}$ curls or wraps around a point, like a whirlpool.

By definition, the curl is the limit of circulation over the boundary $\gamma$ of an infinitesimal area $dS$:
$$\nabla\times\mathbf{F}=\lim_{ dS \to 0 } \frac{1}{dS}\oint_{\gamma}\mathbf{F}\cdot d\mathbf{r}$$
It is more generally linked to the circulation by the [[Teorema del rotore|curl theorem]].

In [[Cartesian coordinates]] it can written as
$$\nabla\times\mathbf{F}=\begin{vmatrix}
\mathbf{\hat{x}} & \mathbf{\hat{y}} & \mathbf{\hat{z}} \\
\frac{ \partial  }{ \partial x }  & \frac{ \partial  }{ \partial y }  & \frac{ \partial  }{ \partial z }  \\
F_{x} & F_{y} & F_{z}
\end{vmatrix}=\left( \frac{ \partial F_{z} }{ \partial y } - \frac{ \partial F_{y} }{ \partial z }  \right)\mathbf{\hat{x}}+\left( \frac{ \partial F_{x} }{ \partial z } -\frac{ \partial F_{z} }{ \partial x }  \right)\mathbf{\hat{y}}+\left( \frac{ \partial F_{y} }{ \partial x } -\frac{ \partial F_{x} }{ \partial y }  \right)\mathbf{\hat{z}}$$
### In curvilinear coordinates
To find the curvilinear form of the curl, we need to evaluate the circulation
$$\oint_{\gamma}\mathbf{F}\cdot d\mathbf{r}$$
where $\gamma$ is the infinitesimal [[curva|curve]] loop generated by starting at $(u,v,w)$ and successively increasing $u$ and $v$ by infinitesimal amounts, holding $w$ constant. In the infinitesimal limit, this forms a [[superficie|surface]] that can be seen as a rectangle of length $dl_{u}=f\ du$, width $dl_{v}=g\ dv$ and area $d\mathbf{a}=(fg)\ dudv\ \mathbf{\hat{w}}$, where $f$, $g$ and $h$ are functions of position that are specific to a given coordinate system (see [[Curvilinear coordinates functions]]).

If we chose the coordinate system to be right-handed, the integral runs counterclockwise. The "bottom" side yields
$$d\mathbf{r}=f\ du\ \mathbf{\hat{u}}\quad\Rightarrow \quad \mathbf{F}\cdot d\mathbf{r}=(fF_{u})\ du$$
The "top" side is the same, but with a flipped sign and $fF_{u}$ evaluated at $v+dv$ instead of $v$. Together, these give
$$[-(fF_{u})|_{v+dv}+(fF_{u})|_{v}]\ du=-\left[ \frac{ \partial  }{ \partial v } (fF_{u}) \right]\ dudv$$
For the same reasons, the "left" and "right" sides give
$$\left[ \frac{ \partial  }{ \partial u } (gF_{v}) \right]\ dudv$$
so the total is
$$\oint_{\gamma}\mathbf{F}\cdot d\mathbf{r}=\left[\frac{ \partial  }{ \partial u } (gF_{v}) -\frac{ \partial  }{ \partial v } (fF_{u}) \right]\ dudv=\frac{1}{fg}\left[ \frac{ \partial  }{ \partial u } (gF_{v})-\frac{ \partial  }{ \partial v } (fF_{u}) \right]\mathbf{\hat{w}}\cdot d\mathbf{a}$$
The coefficient of $d\mathbf{a}$ defines the $w$ component of the curl. The components in $u$ and $v$ can be composed in the same, with a cyclical permutation through all the coordinates. We get
$$\begin{align}
\nabla\times\mathbf{F}\equiv &\frac{1}{gh}\left[ \frac{ \partial  }{ \partial v } (hF_{w})-\frac{ \partial  }{ \partial w } (gF_{v}) \right]\mathbf{\hat{u}} \\
+&\ \frac{1}{fh}\left[ \frac{ \partial  }{ \partial w } (fF_{u})-\frac{ \partial  }{ \partial u } (hF_{w}) \right]\mathbf{\hat{v}} \\
+&\ \frac{1}{fg}\left[ \frac{ \partial  }{ \partial u } (gF_{v})-\frac{ \partial  }{ \partial v } (fF_{u}) \right]\mathbf{\hat{w}}
\end{align}$$
which gives
$$\oint_{\gamma}\mathbf{F}\cdot d\mathbf{r}=(\nabla\times\mathbf{F})\cdot d\mathbf{a}$$
This is *almost* [[Teorema del rotore|Stokes' theorem]], but it currently only applies to an infinitesimal loop. However, any (finite) surface can be broken down into many such loops, with edges overlapping on each other. Since the direction of integration is fixed by the basis, all integrations are done with the same direction, which means that overlapping sides will be integrated over in opposite directions. Since the sides are the same length, they cancel each other out. The only ones left are the external sides that are not adjacent to any other loop, which when combined form the exterior bounding loop of the shape. This works for any finite surface, so we can state
$$\oint_{\gamma}\mathbf{F}\cdot d\mathbf{r}=\int_{S}(\nabla\times\mathbf{F})\cdot d\mathbf{a}$$
which is the correct statement.