A **scalar** is a quantity that can be described by a single number and is invariant under [[coordinate transformation]], as opposed to other objects like [[Vector space|vectors]] or [[matrix|matrices]] which are described by multiple numbers and do transform when coordinates change.

> [!warning] Some clarification
> The definition of "scalar" is somewhat nebulous in physics. In practice, physicists often use it as shorthand for "some real or complex number" and view scalars as 1-to-1 with physical quantities. For instance, time and [[mass]] are both considered scalars (the unit of measurement is not part of the scalar), whereas position (being a vector) is not.
> 
> This is a much more specific definition that what you would find in mathematics, where it is more correctly defined as *an element of a [[field]] that a [[vector space]] is defined over*. In essence, they are the scaling factors of vectors, and their existence is subordinate to the existence of a vector space. Since vector space can get somewhat "esoteric" compared to measurable physical quantities, it's possible for a mathematician to refer to scalars that a physicist would likely never intuitively think of as a scalar, such as a "the number $0$ in the modulo $2$ integer set $\mathbb{Z}/2\mathbb{Z}=\{ 0,1 \}$", and they would still be correct. Still, this number is not in a continuous field and not clearly usable in any physically meaningful context, so it's not "really" a scalar.
> 
> Needless to say, these notes use the loose physicist's definition. If you prefer a rigorous definition, I recommend "a scalar is a rank zero [[tensor]]". But in practice, just replace "scalar" with "real" or "complex number" depending on the context and you'll pretty much always be right.
